The Project Gutenberg EBook Myths And Legends Of Our Own Land, v8
#8 in our series by Charles M. Skinner

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.
                    
Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Myths And Legends Of Our Own Land (On The Pacific Slope)

Author: Charles M. Skinner

Release Date: October, 2004  [EBook #6613]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 31, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS-LEGENDS, BY SKINNER, V8 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





                           MYTHS AND LEGENDS
                                   OF
                              OUR OWN LAND

                                   By
                           Charles M. Skinner

                                Vol. 8.


                          ON THE PACIFIC SLOPE




CONTENTS:

The Voyager of the Whulge
Tamanous of Tacoma
The Devil and the Dalles
Cascades of the Columbia
The Death of Umatilla
Hunger Valley
The Wrath of Manitou
The Spook of Misery Hill
The Queen of Death Valley
Bridal Veil Fall
The Governor's Right Eye
The Prisoner in American Shaft




                          ON THE PACIFIC SLOPE

                        ON THE VOYAGER OF WHULGE

Like the ancient Greeks, the Siwash of the Northwest invest the unseen
world with spiritual intelligence.  Every tree has a soul; the forests
were peopled with good and evil genii, the latter receiving oblation at
the devil-dances, for it was not worth while to appease those already
good; and the mountains are the home of tamanouses, or guardian spirits,
that sometimes fight together--as, when the spirits of Mount Tacoma
engaged with those of Mount Hood, fire and melted stone burst from their
peaks, their bellowing was heard afar, and some of the rocks flung by
Tacoma fell short, blocking the Columbia about the Dalles.

Across these fantastic reports of older time there come echoes of a
later instruction, adapted and blended into native legend so that the
point of division cannot be indicated.  Such is that of the mysterious
voyager of the Whulge--the Siwash name for the sound that takes the name
of Puget from one of Vancouver's officers.  Across this body of water
the stranger came in a copper canoe that borrowed the glories of the
morning.  When he had landed and sent for all the red men, far and near,
he addressed to them a doctrine that provoked expressions of contempt--
a doctrine of love.

To fight and steal no more, to give of their goods to men in need, to
forgive their enemies,--they could not understand such things.  He
promised--this radiant stranger--to those who lived right, eternal life
on seas and hills more fair than these of earth, but they did not heed
him.  At last, wearying of his talk, they dragged him to a tree and
nailed him fast to it, with pegs through his hands and feet, and jeered
and danced about him, as they did about their victims in the devil-
dance, until his head fell on his breast and his life went out.

A great storm, with thunderings and earthquakes!  They took the body
down and would have buried it, but, to! it arose to its feet, as the sun
burst forth, and resumed its preaching.  Then they took the voyager's
word for truth and never harmed him more, while they grew less warlike
as each year went by until, of all Indians, they were most peaceable.




                            TAMANOUS OF TACOMA

Mount Tacoma has always been a place of superstitious regard among the
Siwash (Sauvage) of the Northwest.  In their myths it was the place of
refuge for the last man when the Whulge was so swollen after long rain
that its waters covered the earth.  All other men were drowned.  The
waves pursued the one man as he climbed, rising higher and higher until
they came to his knees, his waist, his breast.  Hope was almost gone,
and he felt that the next wave would launch him into the black ocean
that raged about him, when one of the tamanouses of the peak, taking
pity on him, turned his feet to stone.  The storm ceased, and the waters
fell away.  The man still stood there, his feet a part of the peak, and
he mourned that he could not descend to where the air was balmy and the
flowers were opening.  The Spirit of all Things came and bade him sleep,
and, after his eyes were closed, tore out one of his ribs and changed it
to a woman.  When lifted out of the rock the man awoke, and, turning
with delight to the woman, he led her to the sea-shore, and there in a
forest bower they made their home.  There the human race was recreated.

On the shore of the Whulge in after years lived an Indian miser--rare
personage--who dried salmon and jerked the meat that he did not use, and
sold it to his fellow-men for hiaqua--the wampum of the Pacific tribes.
The more of this treasure he got, the more he wanted--even as if it were
dollars.  One day, while hunting on the slopes of Mount Tacoma, he
looked along its snow-fields, climbing to the sky, and, instead of doing
homage to the tamanous, or divinity of the mountain, he only sighed,
"If I could only get more hiaqua!"

Sounded a voice in his ear: "Dare you go to my treasure caves?"

"I dare!"  cried the miser.

The rocks and snows and woods roared back the words so quick in echoes
that the noise was like that of a mountain laughing.  The wind came up
again to whisper the secret in the man's ear, and with an elk-horn for
pick and spade he began the ascent of the peak.  Next morning he had
reached the crater's rim, and, hurrying down the declivity, he passed a
rock shaped like a salmon, next, one in the form of a kamas-root, and
presently a third in likeness of an elk's head.  "'Tis a tamanous has
spoken!"  he exclaimed, as he looked at them.

At the foot of the elk's head he began to dig.  Under the snow he came
to crusts of rock that gave a hollow sound, and presently he lifted a
scale of stone that covered a cavity brimful of shells more beautiful,
more precious, more abundant than his wildest hopes had pictured.  He
plunged his arms among them to the shoulder--he laughed and fondled
them, winding the strings of them about his arms and waist and neck and
filling his hands.  Then, heavily burdened, he started homeward.

In his eagerness to take away his treasure he made no offerings of
hiaqua strings to the stone tamanouses in the crater, and hardly had he
begun the descent of the mountain's western face before he began to be
buffeted with winds.  The angry god wrapped himself in a whirling tower
of cloud and fell upon him, drawing darkness after.  Hands seemed to
clutch at him out of the storm: they tore at his treasure, and, in
despair, he cast away a cord of it in sacrifice.  The storm paused for a
moment, and when it returned upon him with scream and flash and roar he
parted with another.  So, going down in the lulls, he reached timber
just as the last handful of his wealth was wrenched from his grasp and
flung upon the winds.  Sick in heart and body, he fell upon a moss-heap,
senseless.  He awoke and arose stiffly, after a time, and resumed his
journey.

In his sleep a change had come to the man.  His hair was matted and
reached to his knees; his joints creaked; his food supply was gone; but
he picked kamas bulbs and broke his fast, and the world seemed fresh and
good to him.  He looked back at Tacoma and admired the splendor of its
snows and the beauty of its form, and had never a care for the riches in
its crater.  The wood was strange to him as he descended, but at sunset
he reached his wigwam, where an aged woman was cooking salmon.  Wife
and husband recognized each other, though he had been asleep and she
a-sorrowing for years.  In his joy to be at home the miser dug up all
his treasure that he had secreted and gave of his wealth and wisdom to
whoso needed them.  Life, love, and nature were enough, he found, and he
never braved the tamanous again.




                         THE DEVIL AND THE DALLES

In days when volcanoes were playing in the Northwest and the sternly
beautiful valley of the Columbia was a hell of ash and lava, the fiend
men of the land met at intervals on the heated rocks to guzzle and riot
together.  It was at one of these meetings in the third summer after
Tacoma had stopped spouting that the devil urged a lesson from the
growing peace and joy of nature, and prayed the fiend men to desist from
killing and eating each other and live in love.

With a howl of rage at such a proposal they set upon him, tossing their
tails in such a threatening manner that he deemed it best to be off, and
as his hoofs clattered over the country his brain was busy in devising
an escape.  Nearing the mountain bulwarks of an inland sea, whose
breakers' rhythmic roar he heard above the yells of his pursuers, a hope
came into his head, and new vigor into his tail, though you might have
thought the latter accession was not needed, for his tail was of
prodigious length and strength.  He whirled this limb aloft and beat it
on the earth.  A chasm opened at the stroke, and the devil skipped
across to the safe side of it.

Safe?  No; for the fiend men in advance took the leap and came beside
him.  The tormented one could thrash any two of them at once, but he was
not equal to a thousand.  He brandished his weapon once more and it fell
with a crash.  Earth shook, dust arose in clouds, and a deeper cleft
than before yawned through the valley.  Again the fiend men tried to
reach him, and, though the gap was bigger and many fell into it,
hundreds made the jump and overtook him.  He must make one more attempt.
The tail revolved for a third time, and with the energy of despair he
flailed the ground with it.

A third ravine was split through the rock, and this time the earth's
crust cracked away to the eastward, giving outlet to the sea, which came
pouring through the canon, breaking rocks from mountains and grinding
them to powder in its terrific progress.  Gasping with fatigue, the
unhappy one toiled up a hill and surveyed his work with satisfaction,
for the flood engulfed the fiend men and they left no member of their
race behind them.

When they had all been happily smashed or drowned, the devil skipped
lightly over the channels he had cut and sought his family, though with
a subdued expression of countenance, for his tail--his strength and
pride--was bruised and broken beyond repair, and all the little imps
that he fathered to the world afterward had little dangling tails like
monkeys' instead of megatheriums', and in time these appendages
disappeared.  But what was the use of them?  The fiend men they had
fought against were dead and the rising race they could circumvent by
subtler means.  The inland sea drained off.  Its bed is now the prairie,
and the three strokes of the devil's tail are indelibly recorded in the
bed of the Columbia at the Dalles.  And the devil never tried to be good
again.




                        CASCADES OF THE COLUMBIA

When the Siwash, as the Northwestern Indians called themselves, were
few, Mount Hood was kept by the Spirit of Storms, who when he shook his
robe caused rain or snow to fall over the land, while the Fire Spirit
flashed his lightnings from Mount Adams.  Across the vale between them
stretched a mighty bridge of stone, joining peak to peak, and on this
the Siwash laid his offering of salmon and dressed skins.  Here, too,
the tribal festivals were kept.  The priestess of the arch-Mentonee, who
fed the fire on the tribal altar "unimpassioned by a mortal throb"--had
won the love of the wild tamanouses of the mountains, but she was
careless alike of coaxing and threats, and her heart was as marble to
them.

Jealous of each other, these two spirits fell to fighting, and, appalled
by the whirl of fire and cloud, of splintering trees and crumbling
rocks, the Indians fled in terror toward the lowlands, but she, unhurt
and undaunted, kept in her place, and still offered praise to the one
god.  Yet she was not alone, for watchful in the shadow of a rock stood
a warrior who had loved her so long, without the hope of lovers, that
he, too, had outgrown fear.  Though she had given him but passing words
and never a smile, his own heart was the warmer and the heavier with its
freight, and it was his way to be ever watching her in some place where
she might not be troubled by the sight of him.

The war waxed fiercer, and at last the spirits met at the centre of the
arch, and in roar and quake and deluge the great bridge swayed and
cracked.  The young man sprang forward.  He seized Mentonee in his arms.
There was time for one embrace that cheated death of sorrow.  Then, with
a thunder like a bursting world, the miles of masonry crashed down and
buried the two forever.  The Columbia leaps the ruins of the bridge in
the rapids that they call the Cascades, and the waters still brawl on,
while the sulky tamanouses watch the whitened floods from their
mountain-tops, knowing that never again will they see so fair a creature
as Mentonee.




                          THE DEATH OF UMATILLA

Umatilla, chief of the Indians at the Cascades of the Columbia, was one
of the few red men of his time who favored peace with the white settlers
and lent no countenance to the fierce revels of the "potlatch."  In
these "feasts of gifts" the savages, believing themselves to be
"possessed by the spirit," lashed themselves into a frenzy that on
several occasions was only quieted by the shedding of blood.  Black
Eagle's Feather--or Benjamin, as he was called by the settlers--was the
only one of the children of the old chief who survived a summer of
plague, and on this boy Umatilla had put all his hopes and affections.

The lad had formed a great trust in his white teacher, a college-bred
man from the East, who had built a little school-house beside the
Columbia and was teaching the Indian idea how to shoot something beside
white people.  This boy and his teacher had hunted together; they had
journeyed in the same canoe; had tramped over the same trail to the
great falls of the Missouri; and at the Giant Spring had seen the
Piegans cast in their gifts, in the belief that the manitou of the place
would deliver them in the hereafter to the sun-god, whom they
worshipped.  One day Benjamin fell ill, and the schoolmaster saw that
he, too, was to die of the plague.  Old Umatilla received the news with
Indian stoicism, but he went into the forest to be alone for a time.

When he returned day was breaking and a flock of wild-geese trumpeted
overhead.  The boy heard them, and said, "Boston tilicum" (white man),
"does the Great Father tell the geese where to go?"

"Yes."

"Then he will tell me, too?"

"Yes."

"We shall never go back to the Missouri together.  My father--"

"We will watch over him."

"That is well."  And, in a few hours, he had intrusted the guidance of
his soul through the world of shadows to the white man's unseen father.

Umatilla sat beside the body through the night, and in the morning he
called his people together.  He told them that he was prepared to follow
his boy out of the world, but that first he wanted to have their promise
that they would no longer war on the whites, but look to them for
friendship and guidance.  There was some murmuring at this, for the
ruder fellows were already plotting a descent on the settlers, but
Umatilla had given them great store of goods at the last potlatch, and
they reluctantly consented.  The venerable chief ordered them to make a
grave for Benjamin like the white man's, and, when it had been dug, four
warriors laid the body of his son within it.  Then, standing at the
brink, the chief said, "My heart is growing cold, for it is in the grave
there with my son.  When I take three steps to the side of him, I, too,
shall die.  Be good to the white men, as you have said, and bury us both
together.  Great Spirit, I come."  And, sinking to the ground, the old
man's life ebbed in a breath.  They buried him and his son in a single
grave, and next day they went to the teacher and asked him to lead and
instruct them.  And with that year ended all trouble between red and
white men along the Columbia.




                              HUNGER VALLEY

East of San Francisco is a narrow valley opening to the bay of San
Pablo.  In spite of its pleasant situation and fruitful possibilities,
it had no inhabitants until 1820, when Miguel Zamacona and his wife
Emilia strayed into it, while on a journey, and, being delighted with
its scenery, determined to make it their home.  In playful mockery of
its abundance they gave to it the name El Hambre [Hunger] valley.

After some weeks of such hardship as comes to a Mexican from work,
Miguel had built an adobe cabin and got a garden started, while he
caught a fish or shot a deer now and then, and they got on pretty well.
At last it became necessary that he should go to Yerba Buena, as San
Francisco was then called, for goods.  His burros were fat and strong,
and there should be no danger.  Emilia cried at being left behind, but
the garden had to be tended, and he was to be back in exactly three
weeks.  She waited for twenty-two days; then, her anxiety becoming
unendurable, she packed an outfit on a burro and started on the trail.
From time to time she called his name, and "Miguel!" echoed sweetly from
hills and groves, but there was no other answer, save when an owl would
hoot.  Rolled in a blanket she slept on lupin boughs, but was off at
peep of day again, calling--calling--high and clear among the solitudes.

During the second day her burro gave a rasping bray, and a hee-haw
answered from the bush.  It was Miguel's burro.  He had come at last!
Leaping to her feet, in her impatience, she ran to meet him, and found
him lying on the earth, staring silently at the sky.  All that day she
sat beside him, caressing his hand, talking, crying, bathing his face
with water from the marsh--the poison marsh--and it was not until sunset
that she could bring herself to admit that he was dead--had been dead
for at least two days.

She put the blanket over him, weighted it with stones, and heaped reeds
upon it; then she started for home.  A wandering trader heard her story,
but years elapsed before any other settler entered Hunger valley.  They
found her skeleton then in the weedy garden.  The adobe stands
tenantless in the new village of Martinez, and the people have so often
heard that the ghosts of the Zamaconas haunt the place that they have
begun to disbelieve it.




                           THE WRATH OF MANITOU

The county called Kern, in California, lies mostly in a circular valley,
and long, long before the evil one had created the pale face it was the
home of a nation advanced in arts, who worshipped the Great Spirit in a
building with a lofty dome.  But the bravery and wisdom of one of their
own people made them forget the Manitou and idolize the man who seemed
the most like him.  They brought him to the temple and prayed and sang
to him, and held their sacred dances there, so angering God that he rent
the earth and swallowed them.  Nothing was seen of this people for years
after, but their stone tools were left on neighboring hill-sides.
Manitou even poured water into the valley, and great creatures sported
in the inland sea.

But, ere long, he repented his anger, and, in a fit of impatience at
what he had done, he threw up quantities of earth that smoked with heat,
and thus created the Sierra Nevada, while he broke away the hills at the
foot of the lake, and the waters drained into the sea at the Golden
Gate.  This again made dry land of the valley, and, opening the earth
once more, he released the captive tribe.  The imprisoned people had not
forgotten their arts nor their boldness; they made the place blossom
again; they conquered other tribes, and Manitou declared them his chosen
ones, from whom alone he would accept sacrifice.  But their chief became
so ambitious that he wanted to supplant the Manitou in the worship of
the people, and finally, in a lunacy of self-conceit, he challenged the
god to single combat.

Under pretence of accepting the challenge, the Great Spirit set the
offenders to wander through the desert until they reached a valley in
the Sierras, opposite Tehachapi, where he caused them to be exterminated
by a horde of savages from the Mojave desert.  Then, in a fit of disgust
at refractory humanity, he evoked a whirlwind and stripped away every
living thing from the country of the savages, declaring that it should
be empty of human beings from that time forward.  And it was so.




                         THE SPOOK OF MISERY HILL

Tom Bowers, who mined on Misery Hill, near Pike City, California, never
had a partner, and he never took kindly to the rough crowd about the
place.  One day he was missing.  They traced his steps through the snow
from his cabin to the brink of a great slope where he had been
prospecting, but there they vanished, for a landslide had blotted them
out.  His body was exhumed far below and decently buried, yet it was
said that it was so often seen walking about the mouth of his old shaft
that other men avoided the spot.

Thriftless Jim Brandon, in a spasm of industry, began work on the
abandoned mine, and for a while he made it pay, for he got money and
squared accounts with his creditors; but after a time it appeared that
somebody else was working on the claim, for every morning he found that
the sluice had been tampered with and the water turned on.  He searched
for the trespasser in vain, and told "the boys" that if they called that
joking it had grown tiresome.

One night he loaded his rifle, and, from a convenient nook, he watched
for the intruder.  The tamaracks crooned in the wind, the Yuba mumbled
in the canon, the Sierras lay in a line of white against the stars.  As
he crept along to a point of better vantage he came to a tree with
something tacked on it--something that shone in the dark like a match.
In its own light he read, "Notice!  I, Thomas Bowers, claim this ground
for placer mining."  Raising his hand to tear off the paper, he was
amazed to feel a thrill pass through it, and his arm fell palsied at his
side.  But the notice was gone.

Now came the sound of water flowing, and, as he angrily caught his gun
and turned toward the sluice, the letters shone again in phosphorescence
on the tree.  There was the sound of a pick in the gravel now, and,
crawling stealthily towards the sluice, he saw, at work there, Tom
Bowers--dead, lank, his head and face covered with white hair, his eyes
glowing from black sockets.  Half unconsciously Jim brought his rifle to
his shoulder and fired.  A yell followed the report, then the dead man
came running at him like the wind, with pick and shovel in either hand.

Away went Brandon, and the spectre followed, up hill, in and out of
woods, over ditches, through scrub, on toward Pike City.  The miners
were celebrating a new find with liberal potations and a dance in the
saloon when, high above the crash of boots, the shouted jokes, the
laughter, and the clink of glasses, came a sound of falling, a scream-
then silence.  They hurried into the road.  There lay Brandon's rifle,
and a pick and shovel with "T. B."  cut in the handles.  Jim returned
no more, and the sluice is running every night on Misery Hill.




                        THE QUEEN OF DEATH VALLEY

In the southern part of California, near the Arizona line, is the famous
Death Valley--a tract of arid, alkaline plain hemmed in by steep
mountains and lying below the level of the sea.  For years it was
believed that no human being could cross that desert and live, for
horses sink to their knees in drifts of soda dust; there is no water,
though the traveller requires much drink; and the heat is terrific.
Animals that die in the neighborhood mummify, but do not decay, and it
is surmised that the remains of many a thoughtless or ignorant
prospector lie bleached in the plain.  On the east side of Dead Mountain
are points of whitened rock that at a distance look like sheeted
figures, and these, the Indians say, are the ghosts of their brethren.

In the heart of this desert is said to be the ruin of a pueblo, or
village, though the shape and size of it suggest that it was made for a
few persons rather than for a tribe or family.  Long ago, the tale runs,
this place of horrors was a fair and fertile kingdom, ruled by a
beautiful but capricious queen.  She ordered her subjects to build her a
mansion that should surpass those of her neighbors, the Aztecs, and they
worked for years to make one worthy of her, dragging the stones and
timbers for miles.  Fearing lest age, accident, or illness should forbid
her to see the ending of her dream, she ordered so many of her subjects
to assist that her tribe was reduced to practical slavery.

In her haste and heartlessness she commanded her own daughter to join
the bearers of burdens, and when the toilers flagged in step in the
noonday heat she strode among them and lashed their naked backs.  As
royalty was sacred, they did not complain, but when she struck her
daughter the girl turned, threw down her load of stone, and solemnly
cursed her mother and her kingdom; then, overcome by heat and weariness,
she sank to the earth and died.  Vain the regrets and lamentations of
the queen.  The sun came out with blinding heat and light, vegetation
withered, animals disappeared, streams and wells dried up, and at last
the wretched woman gave up her life on a bed of fever, with no hand to
soothe her dying moments, for her people, too, were dead.  The palace,
half-completed, stands in the midst of this desolation, and sometimes it
seems to lift into view of those at a distance in the shifting mirage
that plays along the horizon.




                             BRIDAL VEIL FALL

The vast ravine of Yo Semite (Grizzly Bear), formed by tearing apart the
solid Sierras, is graced by many water-falls raining down the mile-high
cliffs.  The one called Bridal Veil has this tale attached to it.
Centuries ago, in the shelter of this valley, lived Tutokanula and his
tribe--a good hunter, he, a thoughtful saver of crops and game for
winter, a wise chief, trusted and loved by his people.  While hunting,
one day, the tutelary spirit of the valley--the lovely Tisayac--revealed
herself to him, and from that moment he knew no peace, nor did he care
for the well-being of his people; for she was not as they were: her skin
was white, her hair was golden, and her eyes like heaven; her speech was
as a thrushsong and led him to her, but when he opened his arms she rose
lighter than any bird and vanished in the sky.

Lacking his direction Yo Semite became a desert, and when Tisayac
returned she wept to see the corn lands grown with bushes and bears
rooting where the huts had been.  On a mighty dome of rock she knelt and
begged the Great Spirit to restore its virtue to the land.  He did so,
for, stooping from the sky, he spread new life of green on all the
valley floor, and smiting the mountains he broke a channel for the pent-
up meltings of the snows, and the water ran and leaped far down, pooling
in a lake below and flowing off to gladden other land.  The birds
returned, the flowers sprang up, corn swayed in the breeze, and the
people, coming back, gave the name of Tisayac to South Dome, where she
had knelt.

Then came the chief home again, and, hearing that the spirit had
appeared, was smitten with love more strong than ever.  Climbing to the
crest of a rock that spires three thousand feet above the valley, he
carved his likeness there with his hunting-knife, so that his memory
might live among his tribe.  As he sat, tired with his work, at the foot
of the Bridal Veil, he saw, with a rainbow arching around her, the form
of Tisayac shining from the water.  She smiled on him and beckoned.  His
quest was at an end.  With a cry of joy he sprang into the fall and
disappeared with Tisayac.  Two rainbows quivered on the falling water,
and the sun went down.




                         THE GOVERNOR'S RIGHT EYE

Old Governor Hermenegildo Salvatierra, of Presidio, California, sported
only one eye--the left--because the other had been shot out by an Indian
arrow.  With his sound one he was gazing into the fire, on a windy
afternoon in the rainy season, when a chunky man in a sou'wester
wasushered into his presence, and after announcing that he was no other
than Captain Peleg Scudder, of the schooner General Court, from Salem,
he was made welcome in a manner quite out of proportion in its warmth
to the importance that such a disclosure would have for the every-day
citizen.

He was hailed with wassail and even with wine.  The joy of the
commandant was so great that at the third bowl he sang a love ballad, in
a voice somewhat cracked, and got on the table to teach the Yankee how
to dance the cachuca.  The law forbade any extended stay of Americans in
Spanish waters, and the General Court took herself off that very night--
for this, mind you, was in 1797, when the Spaniard ruled the farther
coast.

Next day Salvatierra appeared before his astonished people with a right
eye.  The priests attached to the fort gave a special service of praise,
and told the miracle to the red men of their neighborhood as an
illustration of the effect of goodness, prayer, and faith.  People came
from far and near that they might go to church and see this marvel for
themselves.  But, alas, for the governor's repute for piety!  It soon
began to be whispered around that the new eye was an evil one; that it
read the deepest thoughts of men with its inflexible, cold stare; that
under its influence some of the fathers had been betrayed into
confessing things that the commandant had never supposed a clergyman to
be guilty of.  The people feared that eye, and ascribed such rogueries
to the old man as had been entirely foreign to his nature hitherto.

This common fear and suspicion reacted, inevitably, and Salvatierra
began, unconsciously, to exhibit some of the traits that his subjects
said he possessed.  He changed slowly from the indulgent parent to the
stern and exacting law-giver.  He did not know, however, what the people
had been saying about him, and never suspected that his eye was likely
to get him into trouble.

It was a warm night and he had gone to bed with his windows open--
windows that opened from his garden, and were level, at the bottom, with
the floor.  A shadowy form stole along the gravel path and entered one
of these windows.  It was that of a mission Indian.  He had gathered
from the talk of the faithful that it would be a service to the deity as
well as to men to destroy the power of that evil eye.  He came beside
the bed and looked attentively at the governor, sleeping there in the
light of a candle.  Then he howled with fright--howled so loudly that
the old man sprang to his feet--for while the left eye had been fast
aleep the evil one was broad awake and looking at him with a ghostly
glare.

In another second the commandant was at the window whirling his trusty
Toledo about his head, lopping ears and noses from the red renegades who
had followed in the track of the first.  In the scrimmage he received
another jab in the right eye with a fist.  When day dawned it was
discovered, with joy, that the evil eye was darkened--and forever.  The
people trusted him once more.  Finding that he was no longer an object
of dread, his voice became kinder, his manner more gentle.  A heavy and
unusual rain, that had been falling, passed off that very day, so that
the destruction from flood, which had been prophesied at the missions,
was stayed, and the clergy sang "Te Deum" in the church.  The old
commandant never, to his dying day, had the heart to confess that the
evil eye was only a glass one.




                      THE PRISONER IN AMERICAN SHAFT

An Indian seldom forgets an injury or omits to revenge it, be it a real
or a fancied one.  A young native of the New Almaden district, in
California, fell in love with a girl of the same race, and supposed that
he was prospering in his suit, for he was ardent and the girl was,
seemingly, not averse to him; but suddenly she became cold, avoided him,
and answered his greetings, if they met, in single words.  He affected
to care not greatly for this change, but he took no rest until he had
discovered the cause of it.  Her parents had conceived a dislike to him
that later events proved to be well founded, and had ordered or
persuaded her to deny his suit.

His retaliation was prompt and Indian-like.  He killed the father and
mother at the first opportunity, seized the girl when she was at a
distance from the village, and carried her to the deserted quicksilver
mine near Spanish Camp.  In a tunnel that branched from American Shaft
he had fashioned a rude cell of stone and wood, and into that he forced
and fastened her.  He had stocked it with water and provisions, and for
some weeks he held the wretched girl a captive in total darkness,
visiting her whenever he felt moved to do so until, his passion sated,
he resolved to leave the country.

As an act of partial atonement for the wrong he had done, he hung a
leather coat at the mouth of the tunnel, on which, in picture writing,
he indicated the whereabouts of the girl.  Search parties had been out
from the time of her disappearance, and one of them chanced on this clue
and rescued her as she was on the point of death.  The savage who had
exacted so brutal and excessive a revenge fled afar, and his whereabouts
were never known.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS-LEGENDS, BY SKINNER, V8 ***

********* This file should be named cs08w10.txt or cs08w10.zip *********

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, cs08w11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, cs08w10a.txt

This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
